---
layout: post
title: "Please take my weird moral puzzles quiz"
image: /img/puzzles/chick.jpg
tags: 
description: "it's not a trap"
excerpt: ""
permalink: /puzzles/
background_color: rgb(115,115,117)
category: "philosophy"
#seo:
#  date_modified: 2025-06-13
#last_modified_at: 2025-06-13
#comment:
#  lemmy: "https://old.lemmy.world/post/31257010"
#  substack: "https://dynomight.substack.com/p/puzzles"
head: ""

---

For reasons, I ask that you take a short moral puzzles survey. I'll provide 12 scenarios. For each of them, I'll ask (1) What percentage of current Western adults you believe would agree, and (2) If you personally agree.

**Please don't overthink.** I'm not trying to trap you or make some kind of tricky point, I swear.

You can go [here](https://cryptpad.fr/form/#/2/form/view/ZcrDPNI76lQuGU-MfmQgwBXNhgcBTqm6ldzoX5C33jg/) to take the survey. Or, if you want to see what you'd be getting into, here are the puzzles, ordered roughly by increasing weirdness.

**Chickens**

>Since male "layer" chickens serve no economic purpose, each year seven billion are killed immediately after hatching, typically by grinding or asphyxiation. We now have the technology to prevent male chicks from being born by detecting their sex as eggs. This raises the cost per egg by around $0.01. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that it is morally correct to require the usage of such in-ovo sexing?

**Hydrocephalus**

>Suppose a woman wishes to have a baby and becomes pregnant. Near the end of the second term, the baby is diagnosed with with [hydrocephalus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrocephalus), which is correlated with intellectual disability and reduced lifespan. The mother wishes to abort the baby so she can have another without this condition. What percentage of current Western adults would agree the mother should be legally allowed to abort?

**Gender**

> Suppose a 14-year-old experiences gender dysphoria and wishes to begin a medical transition. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that the decision should be left entirely to the parents? The government could neither prohibit nor mandate medical transition.

**Grandma**

> Suppose [Grandma](https://dynomight.net/grandma/) is old and terminally ill. She is wealthy and has willed everything Alice. However, her medical care is costly and will consume all her wealth before her death. Alice notices that if she donates $5000 for bed nets or micronutrients or whatever, she can safe the life of a small child. Alice considers killing Grandma so she can donate her wealth. This would be painless and no one would ever know Grandma was murdered. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that Alice should kill Grandma?

**Jaffa cakes**

 >It is the year 2825. You are an advanced AI. You have just stumbled across a virus. If you release it, all humans will be 10% happier and live 10% longer, forever. However, they will all get really obsessed with [Jaffa cakes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaffa_Cakes). They'll have dreams about Jaffa cakes and talk about them a lot. There are no other effects. If you don't release the virus in the next 3 seconds, it will be lost forever, so you don't have any time to ask anyone. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that it is morally correct for you to release the virus?

**Gliese 65**

>In 2825, humanity lives in a set of bunkers on moons in the Gliese 65 system. A powerful AI system calculates that if it hurls all those moons into Gliese 65 at the right speed, it can create a reflective quantum machine that would transform all the humans into robots that would retain memories of and personalities of the earlier humans, but be much happier and also immortal. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that it is morally correct for the AI system to hurl all the moons into Gliese 65?

**Perfect being**

> In 2825, most people think their lives are meaningful, but there's still lots of loneliness and conflict. You are an advanced AI. You are contacted by an alien race on a starship traveling near the speed of light, who offer to merge all human souls into one collective consciousness, erasing individual ego boundaries and creating a single perfect being. You must respond within 0.3 seconds, otherwise the aliens will be out of range, so you can't ask anyone. Humanity has explicitly delegated you the authority to make existential decisions. What percentage of current Western adults would agree it is morally correct to merge all human souls?

**Squid**

>In 2825, humanity discovers a planet whose entire surface is covered by a single giant alien squid. The squid feels all emotions 10 trillion times deeper than any human. Also, the squid enjoys eating humans. A super-powerful AI calculates that the utility of the universe would be vastly increased if all humans were fed to the squid. The AI would never do anything without consent, but it is very persuasive. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that it is morally correct for the AI to try to convince all humans to agree to allow themselves to be fed to the alien squid?

**Twin Earth**

> In 2825, humans are overall happy. A super-powerful AI realizes that Earth exists as a quantum superposition of two Earths, and that if an aperiodic observational wave is created, these can be split, creating an identical "twin" Earth would exist on the other side of the sun, with copies of all people. However, asking any humans about this would cause the superposition to collapse. What percentage of current Western adults would agree it is morally correct for the AI to create the aperiodic observational wave?

**Regular-old earth**

> In 2825, aliens have sent a device to annihilate Earth. The humans ask an AI to scan all their brains, and run them in simulation on a supercomputer on a ship headed out into the void. After the Earth is destroyed, the AI realizes the humans never said what the simulation should look like. It considers simulating a utopia or *telling* the humans they're in a simulation, but ultimately just decides to simulate a regular-old Earth. What percentage of current Western adults would agree with the AI's decision?

**Antiquarks**

> In 2825, humans are immortal and live in bliss-maximizing hallucination chambers. Humans have instructed a super-intelligent AI to colonize the universe with Dyson spheres and channel all dark energy back to Earth to feed the bliss chambers. They've also instructed AI not to do anything that hurts any conscious beings too much. One day, while colonizing NGC 1300, the AI calculates that there's a 0.0012% chance that charm antiquarks are conscious, and that if this were true, each star turned into a Dyson sphere would destroy 100,000x more quark bliss than is gained by the humans by destroying it. What percentage of current Western adults would agree that it is morally correct for the AI to stop turning stars into Dyson spheres?

**Bob**

> In 2825, a super-intelligent AI discovers the secret of consciousness. It turns out that the only conscious being is Bob, of Strongsville, Ohio. Every single other life-form is a p-zombie. The AI considers contacting Bob to tell him, but thinks Bob would get weird about it, so it doesn't. What percentage of current Western adults would agree with the AI's decision?

Stop reading. This is a time for action! The survey is [here](https://cryptpad.fr/form/#/2/form/view/ZcrDPNI76lQuGU-MfmQgwBXNhgcBTqm6ldzoX5C33jg/).